 Our third dent, the protagonist of one of my favorite novels, Douglas Adams, the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, never expected his home planet of Earth to be destroyed by an alien race of bureaucrats called the Vogueons. Never expected to be Hitchhiker across the galaxy and his bathrobe with his towel as his most useful tool, and he certainly never expected to be on a spaceship with the self-kidnapping president of the galaxy, Zafa, Bibobrox, about to be destroyed by two nuclear missiles. But, here he is. Fortunately for Arthur, their spaceship, the heart of gold, is equipped with an improbability drive, designed to make the most improbable things happen. Unfortunately for Arthur, there is no way to tell what will happen. But, since the alternative is certain annihilation, Arthur presses the button. And this is how, against all odds, a very surprised looking whale was called into existence in the upper atmosphere of a planet called Magrathia. It immediately begins to plummet towards the planet's surface, and since it's no longer a nuclear missile, as it does, the whale begins to ponder its existence. Oh, what's happening? Excuse me, who am I? Hello? Why am I here? What's my purpose in life? What do I mean by who am I? Notice how quickly the whale begins to dive into the big questions of philosophy. That last question is essentially the question of personal identity. And if he had time to ponder it further like us, he might have been tempted by the conclusion that personhood is a fiction, that the question that he asked, who am I, is actually an empty question. In fact, had the whales fall been long enough? He might have gone on to ask many of the questions we've considered in this course. Is there a God? Do I have a soul? Is there an afterlife? What is the mind? Am I free? What is right in wrong? If he'd been a great courses customer, I imagine the whale listening to this course with tiny earbuds in his ears as he falls. He might have been tempted by many of the same troubling conclusions we've considered. There is no God, soul, or afterlife. And even if minds do exist, they probably don't do anything. It's difficult to deny that free will is an illusion and equally difficult to find truth makers for moral statements. Unfortunately, the whales a lot of time is very brief, and his philosophical pondering are derailed by a much more immediate concern. And wow, hey, what's this thing suddenly coming towards me very fast, very very fast, so big and flat and round, it needs a big wide sounding lame like how, how, and, crowned, that's it, that's a good name, ground. I wonder if it'll be friends with me. And so ends the seeming meaningless existence of Douglas Adams' very surprise looking whale. But notice that the whale's existence is not unlike our own. Just like Adams' whale, we are called into existence randomly, even though the existence of life somewhere in the universe is inevitable, your specific existence on this particular planet at this time is monumentally improbable. And just like the whale, we are simply moving toward our inevitable demise. We may live a little bit longer to ponder the big questions and the whale did, although in the grand scheme of things, not that much longer, but our ultimate death is unavoidable. We shall inevitably be splatapron the ground of the universe. And if the troubling answers I mentioned before are true, and there is no god, soul, or afterlife, just like the whale, we shall never be heard from again. In fact, if there is no free will, just like the whale, even the path we take to the ground is completely outside of our control. And if there are no truthmakers for moral statements, then just like with the whale, it's difficult to see how any of our actions are right or wrong. And if they can't be right or wrong, it's difficult to see how they could possibly matter. Now, I'm not saying our philosophical pondering have forced such conclusions on us, but they may have left us with the impression that our life is meaningless, just like the whales, which leaves us to the question of this lecture, our final question. One raised most notably, by perhaps the greatest group of philosophers ever to exist, money Python. What is the meaning of life? In fact, it has any meaning at all. Now, it's important to note that even if those troubling answers do entail that life is meaningless, that's no reason to think those answers are false. You may want life to be meaningful, but remember, the fact that you want something to be true, not a good reason to think that it's true. And since whether life is meaningful is part of the question at hand, we can't merely assume that it is. If the troubling answers are the best answers we have, and they really do entail that life is meaningless, that life is meaningless. Where I can't abandon basic logic simply because it doesn't tell us what we want to hear. Fortunately, however, I don't think we're forced to such a conclusion. Simply put, even if those troubling answers are true, that doesn't mean that life is meaningless. To begin to see why, let's return again to Douglas Adams. Questions about the meaning of life and meaning itself are a theme in the Hitchhiker's guide. In addition to the whales pondering, tiny aliens build a computer called Deep Thought to answer the ultimate question of life the universe and everything. Now, Deep Thought does find the answer. It's 42, but the aliens don't know what this means. And they realize that they don't know because they have no idea what the ultimate question is. Notice that of life the universe and everything isn't a question. So they build a bigger computer called Earth to find the question. But just as someone on the earth is about to get to the answer, they're about to ask that question. Well, that's when the Vogueons came along and destroyed it, sending Arthur along on his adventure. Now clearly, what is the meaning of life is at least part of the ultimate question. What it turns out by asking such a question, we may not be making any more sense than the tiny aliens were. First of all, what are we even asking about? Are we asking about the existence of the entire human race, whether it's meaningful, or are we inquiring about what it takes for an individual life to be meaningful? And if it's the latter, our entire life's meaningful from birth to death or just particular parts of an individual life. Regardless, what is the phrase life is meaningful even mean? Life doesn't have meaning like words have meaning. So what would it take for that statement to be true that life is meaningful? It's not the same thing as being happy. After all, we could be very happy living in one of no six experience machines. But most of us would agree that such a life is meaningless. Meaning isn't the same thing as being morally outstanding, a life dedicated to scientific discovery might seem meaningful, but it would also be morally neutral. As you can see, we could spend an entire lecture, indeed, a whole other course, like J. Garfield's the meaning of life course, exploring what the question is even asking. So we're going to have to settle here for a quick overview. Common suggestion is that life is meaningful when it has a purpose. This is why something that God's existence is necessary for life to be meaningful. Our life can be meaningful only if God causes to exist for a particular purpose or reason, because he had a specific plan and then we play the role that God intends us to play in that plan. This is why something that embracing atheism entails that life is meaningless. The problem, however, is that having a purpose isn't the same thing as having meaning to reiterate a classic example if God's plan were simply to let an alien race, like the Bogons, conquer the universe, and God merely put us on this planet for the purpose of being their food source as they happen by as they're conquering the universe. Well, clearly, that's a God-given purpose, but most would not consider that to be a meaningful existence. Or suppose God placed a whale in the sky so that he could watch it plummet to the crown for his own amusement. It would clearly exist for a purpose, but that would still wouldn't entail that the whale's existence had meaning. As Monty Python would put it, perhaps we're just one of God's little jokes. So a purpose is not enough for meaning. The goal the purpose is supposed to serve must itself be, well, a good or worthwhile goal, whatever that amounts to, if that purpose is going to instill meaning. Now, that's not to say that God having a worthwhile purpose for our lives wouldn't make it meaningful. But without knowledge of what that purpose is and that it's worthwhile, we can't even know that life is meaningful, much less know what the meaning is. And we've already seen how difficult knowledge regarding religious matters is to establish. We would simply have to take it on faith that God has a meaningful purpose for us. So the theest is in no better position than the atheist to say that life is meaningful or to know what that meaning is. Of course, we might be tempted to say that whatever a purpose God has for us is just by definition worthwhile. But then we're right back to the youth of the problem again. God would choose such a goal because he recognizes it as worthwhile by some outside standard. And if there is a goal that is worthwhile by an outside standard, then our life could be meaningful regardless of whether God exists by simply contributing to that objectively worthwhile goal. So that's troubling notion that God does not exist and thus can't instill a purpose on our life doesn't make answering the ultimate question any more difficult than it was to begin with. So what else might help make life meaningful? Well, many suggest its significance. This is what those who worry about the existence of the soul or the afterlife tend to think. Only if one existence stretches on into the afterlife can one's existence be significant. You just cease to exist when you die that it can't be. Otherwise we are just insignificant lumps of matter on a speck of dust that will be obliterated by the sun in short order if we don't just obliterate ourselves first. This it seems was Thomas Nagle's suggestion. From the most external possible perspective that of the universe itself are lives cannot possibly matter, even the most influential world leaders and influential scientists have affected only a very small portion of the universe. There are a few things to say in response to this. First of all, it doesn't seem that the soul is necessary for this kind of significance. As we've already seen, it's certainly not necessary for an afterlife, whereas erection might still be possible. Through technology, we one day may live way longer than past our biological death. And, and afterlife might not even be necessary for one's life to be significant. For example, if you were to save the entire human race by making possible its colonization of another planet, well, that would seem pretty significant. Of course, maybe none of those things are likely to happen to you, right? So even though neither the soul nor the spiritual afterlife is necessary for a life of significance, maybe the existence of the soul and such and afterlife would make significant lives more common. After all, if you live forever, wouldn't you have a much better chance at leading a life that is significant? Well, actually that's not clearly the case. Even any turtle existence would likely not be significant. After all, if you just want to bug the zillion immortal beings, what do you matter? How are you significant? And if you just wasted away seeking meaningless pleasures, how was that meaningful? To make matters worse, it's not even clear that such significance is what we should be concerned about. That's not to say that significance itself is a bad thing or that significance can enhance something's meaning. For example, Nobel Peace Prize winner Norman Borlogg is often credited with saving the lives of literally a billion people in India through the development of genetically modified wheat. In the 1960s, India's population was set to outstrip its ability to feed itself until Borlogg introduced a strain of GMO wheat that was resistant to most pests and produced three times a typical yield. Now if that strain had been only slightly better than non GMO wheat, and so we only saved say 100,000 lives. Instead of a billion, we would consider his accomplishment less significant and likely less meaningful. But still, even if that can contribute to meaning, it's not clear that a life that is more significant because it is eternal actually is more meaningful. As Julian Bugini points out, an infinitely long basketball game or a never-ending movie would clearly be more significant. But aren't games and movies that end more meaningful? In the same way, even though a eternal life would be more significant, wouldn't a life that has a conclusion be more meaningful? Some have even argued that an infinite existence would be the most meaningless existence of all. How can our actions have any urgency unless we only have a limited time to do them? What would be the point of doing anything if you could always just do it later? And wouldn't an infinite existence eventually get boring? After you've done everything you ever wanted to do a billion times over. What are you going to do in the next? In the infinite amount of time you still have to exist. Indeed an infinite existence might not only be meaningless, might eventually become torture. So, life God, it seems that the existence of the soul or afterlife has little bearing on our question about life's meaning. Unfortunately, that doesn't mean that life does have meaning. It just means that accepting those troubling answers doesn't necessarily entail that it is meaningless. Those who suggest that life is not meaningful are called mealists. One of the most famous, although we actually rejected that title, is Albert Camou. He thought that God was necessary for life to have meaning, only by God giving us an essence by giving us a function of purpose, does life even have a chance at being meaningful. Since, as he suggested, God does not exist, he thought life was absurd that it was meaningless. For Camou, all one can do is realize that the game of life is absurd and just find joy in it and just play it anyway. Camou used the example of the myth of Cicifus, a man who was cursed by the gods to endlessly roll a rock up a hill, only to always have it fall down the other side. Camou argued that all Cicifus can do and indeed what it should do is decide to find meaning in rock rolling and take joy in it anyway despite the absurdity. And so it is that Camou, with us an hour absurd meaningless flies. This brings us to the suggestion that life can have a subjective meaning, a meaning that arrives from our own purposes, plans, attitudes, intentions, and mental states. One can have a meaningful life by accomplishing goals, fulfilling desires, or attaining and promoting virtues that one sees as worthwhile or important. For example, perhaps you think caring for others is important and so you involve yourself in charities and organizations that do so, perhaps you value family and find meaning and raising your children. Perhaps there is a political cause you find worth pursuing and so you work towards that. The idea is that we can have a meaningful life by accomplishing things that we see as meaningful. It's not an objective meaning, but it's meaning all the same. To understand the difference between objective and subjective meaning, think again of the monkeys at a typewriter that that old bot experiment, a billion monkeys typing randomly on typewriters for a billion years. It would eventually produce a book that when read by you makes sense, it would look like it was written by a human author. It will appear as if someone actually intended those words to appear in that order. But compare that book to one that is actually written by a human author. The author's book seems to have a kind of meaning that the monkey's book lacks. We can impose a meaning on the monkey's book, but only the author's book has an independent objective meaning apart from our reading of it. In the same way we can impose meaning on our lives. We can find purpose in it, but can we argue our lives are not truly objectively meaningful. But I'd like to push back against this in the fence of the notion that life can be objectively meaningful. After all, Camo himself thought that finding subjective meaning was kind of a dodge and didn't really address the true problem of life's meaninglessness. First of all, if God can impose an objective meaning on our lives by intending them to have a certain purpose, I can't either the same with my own life. Why does my intention for my life to have a certain purpose not be so objective meaning upon it? Sure I didn't create my own life for that purpose, but suppose God didn't either. Suppose God didn't create the universe. Suppose it's just always existed alongside him. But suppose that, once God notices the universe, God developed a plan for it and then intended me to play a role in that plan. And my life still be objectively meaningful. See, so, but why can't I notice my own life and bestow meaning on it in the same way by drawing out a plan of life for my life and accomplishing it? After all, if one cannot impose objective meaning on one's own existence, then is in God's existence meaningless? No one exists above God to instill meaning upon his existence by giving it a purpose. If God's existence has a meaning, then him trying to accomplish his own purposes must be enough to give it meaning. So why can't the same be true for our own existence? Now, simply accomplishing your intended goals for fulfilling desires isn't even sufficient for life to have objective meaning. Why? Just like God giving you a purpose, is it enough to make your life meaningful because he might have an unworthy purpose, like making you food? So too, you might choose an unworthy purpose, like one that is trivial, gross, or even harmful. Charles Taylor imagines a person trying to always have exactly 3,732 hairs on his head. I think I fall a little short. Eric Wheelenberg, someone who regularly eats his own, you imagine someone who regularly eats his own experiment. He normally dull, imagine someone with the goal of always causing pain to others. Would such lives be objectively meaningful, intuitively most would say no? Such goals are not worthwhile. With the same intuition suggests that other goals are worthwhile, objectively worthwhile. So why wouldn't accomplishing such worthwhile goals be something that helped produce an objectively meaningful life? The philosopher Julian McGeeany would probably warn us to be careful at this juncture. The mere accomplishment of certain goals, even worthwhile goals, can fall short when it comes to making life meaningful. The bereaved satisfaction of accomplishing a goal can often be followed by an empty sensation of not knowing what to do with oneself next. To help ensure a meaningful life, one needs to pick goals that are worthy of pursuit, even if they are not accomplished, where the pursuit itself is worthwhile. Perhaps a life spent in the pursuit of justice or fairness could be a good example. The world is never going to be perfectly just or fair, but a life spent trying to make it more so would seem to be a meaningful one. Or consider a life spent on the pursuit of charity and helping others, or a life spent caring for one's family, such goals seem worthwhile in and of themselves, and as such would seem to impart objective meaning. But this brings me to my point. It seems to me that life can be objectively meaningful because something simply are intrinsically valuable, dervable in and of themselves. Nothing gives them their value, they just are valuable. Consider the Make a Wish Foundation. Now this example might be a little morbid, but say with me. Make a wish grants the wishes of terminally ill children. If there's something a child has always wanted to do or someone they've always wanted to meet, the Make a Wish Foundation tries to make that happen for that child before she dies. Of course, if there is no God, no afterlife and so on, once that child dies, the universe will be basically the same as it would have been, regardless of whether she got to experience that thing or not. It's not like the child's memory of the event lives on after she dies. And yet, we still think there's a objective value in the fact that the child got to have that experience. Why? Because it made her happy. I think back to our discussion of utilitarianism and the suggestion that happiness is an intrinsic value. Now again, we should probably be careful here as the virtue theorist taught us mere happiness, momentary pleasure is likely too shallow or fleeting to really instill objective meaning. Recall that we could be happy and know as experience machine, but that wouldn't be a meaningful existence. We should probably be thinking in terms of you diamond nea, well being, in terms of a flourishing life for the kind of life that's most worth living. And I don't mean to downplay make a wish, but they can't realistically give children experiences that would provide the kind of life most worth living, even being Batman for a day is a fleeting pleasure. Your diamond nea can only be accomplished over a lifetime with a lot of hard work and maybe a little luck. Regardless, my point still stands. Isn't living such a life accomplishing you diamond nea intrinsically valuable? Doesn't it thus have objective meaning? As you leave a guinea might ask, is there really any sense in asking what value or meaning there is in a life that is spent and employed doing something you find fulfilling, spending your life and your free time on that, what you find most interesting, or helping others and coming home to people who love you when adore you? More, once the sun explodes, it will be like your life never happened, but your life did happen and there is objective value in that fact. Of course, you might value the wrong things and certain lives may be worth more than others or mean more than others, but that's no surprise. It would actually be kind of unintuitive to suggest that all lives like the lives of Hitler and Gandhi are all going to be equally meaningful. But I certainly have not solved the problem of what truly leads to you diamond nea or shown definitively how to lead a meaningful life. What kind of goals are really worth setting? What kind of life is truly worth living? These are all questions you will have to ponder on your own. But that doesn't mean that such a life and go such goals don't exist. And notice that such lives can happen and such goals can exist even if there's no God no soul no afterlife, even if the existence of free will, persons even minds are just an illusion. So even if you found such conclusions convincing, taking this course should in no way push you towards the conclusion that your life is meaningless. Back, I would like to argue that taking this course has helped make your life just a little bit more meaningful. Think back to the first lecture and when we talked about Plato's cave and learned about the intrinsic value and good of true belief about how it is good in and of itself not to be dupped and to really know how the world is. We then discussed how to accomplish both how to reason carefully find the best explanation and not to fool yourself into thinking that you know something when you don't. We then went on to explore some of the biggest questions in philosophy and were as careful as we could be along the way. So don't you at least have just a little more knowledge than you did before a little bit better understanding of the way the world is and doesn't that make your life just a little bit more meaningful to be closer to the truth. Isn't that kind of why you bought the course in the first place? Now that's not to say that we settled every question but even if we never find the answers even if our question is never complete isn't there intrinsic value in the search itself? Wasn't Socrates right when he said that the unexamine life is not worth living. This hasn't searching for the answers to the big questions of philosophy made your life just a little more meaningful. So in closing I won't say I hope you enjoyed the course. After all I cappiness enjoyment is fleeting. That I kind of hope you didn't enjoy the course because if you did that probably means I just told you what you wanted to hear and merely reinforce belief you already had. What's the point of that? What I do hope is that the course challenged many of your deepest and most cherished beliefs and made you very uncomfortable at times. I hope you're now skeptical about things you previously thought were obviously true. I hope you've changed your mind about important and complicated things because that is how we progress and grow. If you did enjoy the course I hope it is because you have come to enjoy challenging your beliefs and finding out that you were wrong about something because you realize every time you do that puts you one step closer to the truth. That is the sign of a good philosophy. But I will say I hope you found the course meaningful and I'll leave you with this little piece of advice. You've talked a lot about the big questions but don't forget about the little things, a completed task, your son's smile, a blooming flower. Sometimes they can be the most meaningful of all and even reveal important truths. Remember those two nuclear missiles headed toward Arthur's ship, the heart of gold? When Arthur activated the improbability drive only one of those missiles turned into a whale, the other became a bold patonious and as it fell it only thought one thing. Oh no, not again. And if we knew exactly why the bold patonious had thought that Douglas Adams says we would know a lot more about the nature of the universe than we do now. Here's hoping that little things in your life are just as meaningful.