 We just saw Mill argue for freedom of action and speech on utilitarian grounds, but also saw that he was less confident in the free market's ability to guarantee the greatest good for the greatest number. He was particularly concerned with the unequal distribution of wealth that it produced. This problem is still around today, and it seems that government intervention would be necessary to accomplish such a goal. But is that goal worthwhile? Is it just? To answer this question, we must examine the arguments of perhaps the most influential and important political philosopher of the 20th century, John Rawls, and his most famous critic, Robert Nosek. Like Plato, both are trying to articulate what they think would constitute a just society, and like Hobbes Locken Rousseau, they are doing so by envisioning what people would agree to in a state of nature. But Rawls knows it come to very different conclusion. Rawls gives a full defense of his theory in his 624 page masterpiece, a theory of justice. But the essence of his argument can be found in his later 1985, as they called Justice his fairness. In short, Rawls suggests a just society is a fair society, and we should aim to make society as fair as possible. But what does it mean for a society to be fair? We can capture Rawls' basic idea with a thought experiment. Suppose you have 6 people and only one pie. Let's make it my late grandmother's Rousseau pie. She was a master chef, and will make the 6 people my dad and 5 of his brothers at Thanksgiving. Now, in reality, one of them would usually arrive early and just hide the pie from the others that way he had it to himself. Clearly, that is not a fair distribution. But what would be, and how could we ensure that it is distributed fairly? It's quite simple. Put my dad in charge of cutting the pie, but make sure that he gets the last piece. He wants to ensure that he gets the biggest piece possible. He'll make a special effort to ensure the pie is cut as equally as possible. He might even get out of measuring tape. If he cuts it unequally, making some pieces bigger or smaller, his brothers will take the bigger pieces and leave him with the smallest, right? He gets the last piece. Now, of course, we already knew this, dividing and distributing the pie equally is fairest. This novel here is the method by which we derive this conclusion. We ask how would someone divide up the pie if he didn't know which piece he was going to get? Rawls suggests that we can perform a similar thought experiment to discover what a just society looks like. If we imagine a group of people about to be placed into a society without knowledge of what place they will have in that society and then assign them the task of agreeing to principles that will govern that society, we can discover what a just society looks like. We can discover the rules even that would govern it. But how might we imagine such a situation and what principles would they agree to? I like to imagine a situation similar to the one in Christopher Nolan's movie, Interstellar. So, suppose we one day make Earth inhospitable to human life and there's no way to get the remaining humans physically off the planet. So to save the human race, we send billions of frozen fertilized embryos to populate a new planet. And so that we survive, each of us records our DNA and neural configuration onto a hard drive and we arrange things so that each of the embryos will have one of our DNA neural configurations imprinted onto it like whatever DNA the embryo would usually has it'll have our DNA after the imprint and it'll have our neural structure. Machines will build the infrastructure of a functioning society and the newly imprinted embryos will then populate that society. Okay, that's the initial situation here. But let's also suppose that we recognize that it was abuses of power made possible by social injustices that rendered the Earth inhospitable. People in positions of power refused to admit that their greed was destroying the planet until it was too late. We don't want to condemn the new society to the same fate so we want to give them an opportunity to design their society to be just. To accomplish this, Rawls would suggest that we let the embryos develop to adulthood but wait to imprint them, letting them remain what we might call blank prototypes for a while. Instead, we would first give them a basic education about the world in the society works. They'll learn about government laws and jails and finds and about how people have different life plans based on their talents and abilities and values through a study of Earth history. They'll even learn that unlike the pison area, equality is practically impossible that things like communism just end up making things worse for everyone. So they'll learn that their society will have a social ladder. They'll be rich and poor and easy jobs and hard jobs and good pay and lousy pay. And likely not enough jobs for everyone. This will put them in what Rawls calls the original position. They're going to, they're about to be placed into a society with a general knowledge of how that society will work. We would then give them the task of agreeing upon rules that would serve as that society's organizing principles. But to make sure those principles are just or fair, Rawls would suggest, we should keep them ignorant about which pattern will be imprinted on them. We'd give them access to the hard drive so they can see what person they could be. Looking at the list, well, this is Bob Bucket. He's a famous movie star with millions of dollars. Here's Jane Doe. She's a working mother of three who goes to church and always wanted to be a singer. This is John Smith. He's been left unable to work by a series of health problems and accidents. This is Joe Blow. He has a mental illness and likes to murder people. They could be anyone of these people. But they'll have no idea who they will be. This will place them under what Rawls called a veil of ignorance. Consequently, they'll have no idea what wrong on the social ladder. They'll be on whether they'll be rich or poor or famous or unknown. They won't know what job they'll have or will even want to have. They will have no idea what their talents or abilities will be. What kind of life they'll want, what they'll value, whether they'll be secular or religious or into sports or books and philosophy, even their gender will be unknown to them. If this is true, just like my dad and uncles with the Rubar pie, the principles and laws they agree to. It'll be Rawls argues as fair as possible. So what principles of justice would the blank prototypes in the original position under a veil of ignorance agree to? Well, pretend you're one of the prototypes. First of all, since you could literally end up being anyone in society, you'd want to protect all people's liberty equally. Even though you don't know what values or life plans you'll end up having, you do know you'll want the liberty to pursue those plans. Now, you wouldn't want to protect Joe Blow, the murderers' liberty to murder others after all. It's much more likely that you'd be one of Joe's victims that end up being Joe himself. Of course, it's still possible that you could be Joe, right? You might end up being Joe. So you don't want to just kill him or toss him aside. Joe should get the kind of medical help he obviously needs, or if he has to be locked away, he should at least have access to basic necessities, because you might end up being Joe. For such reasons, Rawls argues the prototypes would agree on principle of justice number one. Quote, each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive scheme of equal basic liberties, compatible with the similar scheme of liberties for others, in Quote. As you might notice, this is somewhat like Mills harm principle, but instead of being restricted from nothing besides that which harms others, you're restricted from nothing other than interfering with other people's liberty. But what about economic resources? How should they be divided? Well, the prototypes have been educated about how societies work, so they know that completely quality is a pipe dream. There will be a social ladder, but they also know they could end up occupying any wrong on that social ladder. Of course, fondingly, they would want two things to be true of this social ladder. First, they'll want it to be traversable. Movement up and down the social ladder should be possible for anyone. We don't want people working jobs that are unqualified for, but we wouldn't want tradition or a caste system or economic status or unequal access to education to lock people in their socioeconomic place. Mill would like this. It would also involve taxes and laws regarding inheritance that prevent specific families from amassing all the wealth and power and passing it down over the generations, basically locking off people from attaining that higher-run on the social ladder. Second roles are used, while they would realize that socioeconomic inequalities are inevitable, they would want those that do exist to work to everyone's advantage, especially the least fortunate. Now, what does this mean? It doesn't mean that they simply want to redistribute wealth to make the difference between the rich and poor as small as possible. Suppose, for example, that we have an economic system where the income is range from 50,000 to 10 million. To reduce income inequality, let's say we impose a salary cap so that any income over 100,000 will be redistributed by those who make the least. But by doing so, the rich no longer have extra money to invest and start a business, and no one wants to do the previously high-paying jobs that were difficult but highly valuable. Like, no one wants to be a doctor or an engineer because it's just not worth the work. You don't make enough money by doing so. It's too much schooling and that kind of stuff. Consequently, the economy stagnates. And the stagnation is so bad that even with redistribution from the rich, the lowest income drops all the way down to 5,000, and now there are no more hospitals or roads and bridges. Even though this would greatly reduce income disparity from millions down to 95,000, this would not be preferable. Not only did the poorest benefit from hospitals and roads that existed in the previous arrangement that were made possible by those higher salaries, but this change actually made them financially worse off before they were making 50,000, and now they're only making five. The first system was better. Now, we wouldn't want the millionaires in the first system to use, to be able to use their wealth, to keep others from attaining it. That would violate the previously mentioned social mobility provides. My point of simply that for Rawls income inequality itself is not necessarily a bad thing. As long as the fact that that fact that there isn't income inequality makes everyone better off. And so Rawls argues people in the original position under the veil of ignorance would also agree to principal justice number two, quote, social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both A, reasonably expected to be to everyone's advantage, and B attached to positions and offices open to all. Now, even my example and the fact that Rawls is okay with income inequality that benefits everyone, you might think that Rawls argument could be used to defend supply side economics, where it's thought that giving more money to the rich allows them to expand their businesses, create more jobs, stimulate the economy, and thus give the poor more money than they otherwise would have. And Rawls theory would favor supply side economics if it worked. Unfortunately, it does not. The failure of supply side economics also known as trickle down economics is one of the most well-established facts in all of economics. In the United States, the tax rate on the richest went from over 90 percent to approximately 35 percent from the 50s to 2000, and yet reduction in top tax rates never correlated with income growth, income economic growth, wage growth, or job creation. As the international monetary fund put it in June 2015, increasing the income share of the poor and the middle class actually increases growth while arising income share of the top 20 percent results in lower growth. That is when the rich get richer benefits do not trickle down. Truth be told, and I think Rawls would agree, it seems that no economic system just naturally generates inequality that works to everyone's advantage. The only way to make sure that inequality works to everyone's advantage is with government intervention. Rawls is not a communist. He realizes that forcing total equality would just make everyone poor. A free market is needed for economic growth and to generate income. But once the highest incomes are high enough to generate incentive for the highly valuable and difficult jobs and to keep the economy functioning in healthy, all extra money should be taxed and redistributed to the poor. Either directly through some kind of welfare programs such as pensions for the elderly, or by using that money on programs to give equal opportunities to the poor, subsidized housing, soup kitchens, education, and like. It will take some work and try trial and error to find just the right balance. But it's a balanced work finding, Rawls would say. And people in the original position under a bail of ignorance would agree, although if you're rich, it would be frustrating to have a large portion of your money taken in taxes. That's nothing compared to the frustration of someone who's homeless because they can't find a job or who works two jobs and still can't afford to feed their family. Someone in the original position would much rather avoid being the second person. They realize they could be either, but they want to avoid being the second person more. Even if this meant they could end up being a rich person who salary is capped. After all, how much pain can someone suffer by being forced to live on what in reality is far more than most people need to live comfortably? Now, given that the US has many such programs for the poor, you might think that the US is a fair and just Rawls' in state. But it decidedly is not. People in the original position would not agree with a minimum wage not being a living wage as it is in many states. And they would also object to the wealthiest, paying a lower percentage of their wealth in taxes than middle-class earners. But our economic situation is not the only thing that makes the US fall short of the Rawls' in ideal. But political offices are legally open to everyone and practice they're not open to all. Only those who are independently wealthy can actually be successfully elected to important offices. In fact, a 2014 study by Martin Gillianz of Princeton and Benjamin I. Page of Northwestern showed that only the rich have real political influence in the US. This includes lobbyists and corporations. Although a represented democracy in name and practice were really an allegarchy. Society or the rich few have all the political power. Similar inequalities regarding education and opportunity make the social ladder untroversible. Many jobs are off limits to sun simply because of their social status. We don't have a caste system per se but your birth largely determines your place on the social ladder. Also, the things we make illegal on the grounds of morality, religion, offense or self-harm would not square with Rawls' first principle. Take for example, US laws prohibiting polygamy, new dancing, selling him smoking to marijuana, indies and speech, and assisted suicide. And then there are laws that restrict religious equality. No one in the original position would agree to have a single religion's tenets be the basis for law or to have a single religion's symbols displayed at the courthouse or keep any religion from erecting places of worship. Nevertheless, such practices are more than common throughout the United States. But of course Rawls is not without the tractors. Some suggest that people in the original position under a veil of ignorance would be unable to come to any kind of decision about which principles of justice to adopt because without knowing who they are, such persons would actually have no values at all. They wouldn't even value their own liberty. Now, this may seem strange, right? Doesn't everyone value their liberty? But take for example, the Suni Boras, a particularly conservative sect of Suni Islam in which through distinction between religion and law, is blurred. Even when they live in a land that is not controlled by Suriyalah, they defer to it. Even when doing so does not favor their interests and restricts their liberty. Submission to authority is more important to them. Personal liberty actually stands in the way of their life goal of true religious devotion. Others, however, object that Rawls has at all Rawls, that we should not even be concerned with fairness in justice as Rawls defines them. And this brings us to the most famous objection to Rawls made by his Harvard colleague Robert Nosek, in his book, Anarchy, State, and Utopia. In a nutshell, Nosek includes that Rawls fails to consider how the wealth of those in society is acquired and thus fails to appreciate the unfairness or injustice of taking what someone earned and giving it to those who did not. And the basis of his claim is familiar, natural rights, specifically the light to life liberty and property and to have ones contracts honored. To take from the rich and give to the poor, Nosek argues violates these rights. Nosek defends his view by reimagining how we emerge from the state of nature. Basically, to protect their natural rights, Nosek says people would voluntarily ban together and hire protectors, what Plato might have called guardians. Now, as these associations competed, they and their guardian forces would combine and grow larger. Eventually, they would become large enough to be considered a nation and their guardian force would be a government. But it would be a government supported only by the voluntary contributions of those it protects and whose only role is the protection of natural rights. It would enforce contracts and protect its citizens from theft and foreign invasion and from getting beaten up and killed or enslaved by their neighbors. But that is all it would do. Now, you might wonder, if the government is supported only by voluntary contributions, what about free loaders who live in an area guarded by the guardians, but who refuse to pay for their services should the guardians force them to pay? No, it says Nosek. They should not force the free loaders to pay that would be immoral. It's wrong to harm anyone without their consent. It's forcing protection money out of the free loaders would be harming them without their consent, violating the right to property. It should not be done, Nosek said. Yet, the free loaders and those exas should still enjoy the protections the government provides. Why? Well, their protection from invasion is just going to be automatic since they live in the protected area, right? But they should also be protected from theft, violence, enslavement, and contract violations, because Nosek says, it's just wrong to just stand by and let someone's rights be violated or be harmed if you can prevent. A guardian can't just stand by and let someone be enslaved because they haven't paid their dues. Besides, in order to fulfill their contract with paying members, the guardians are going to have to restrict the liberty of the free loaders anyway. They can't just let a thieving free loader steal from paying members, it has to be locked up. But, Nosek says, it's never right to restrict someone's liberty without giving them something in return. That too would be immoral. So the guardians must essentially treat free loaders as they facto paying members. A given this, you might wonder what's to stop everyone from just refusing to pay and that's becoming a non-paying to facto member. This the threat says Nosek of returning to the state of nature. Some people might become free loaders, yes. But as soon as things start rebelling through the state of nature, most people will be glad deponing up the dough to keep the government going. But again, it will be a government that provides protection only. Anything else? Would he be harming someone without their consent or violating their liberty without giving them something in return? No roads, no education, no healthcare, all that would have to be done by private enterprise so that the necessary funds would be acquired voluntarily. No minimum wage, no labor laws, and certainly new redistribution of wealth each requires unjust coercion. Now, I was a good mitts. This system isn't going to be perfect. It certainly isn't going to generate the greatest happiness for the greatest number. Some people, for example, will starve. While others will have more food than they need. And that is, Nosek says an unfortunate evil. But he says, you shouldn't rectify one evil starvation with another one. Draft. Who wrongs don't make a right? And it's still wrong to harm others by taking from them what they have earned without their consent. And this, Nosek argues, is what Gral's failed to recognize. All's defined just as using a situation where no one had earned anything. And so everyone had an equal claim to the available resources, right? They had an earned nothing. You're about to be placed into a society. But in the real world, people earn things. And when they do, it's wrong to take what they earn without their consent, regardless of what you do with it afterwards. Now, Nosek admits that not everyone actually deserves everything they earn. In what people are able to earn is simply due to their talents and their social status, which is just an accident of birth, a matter of luck. They didn't earn those talents or status, and so they are not deserved. And thus, what they earn, Nosek admits, with their talents and status, is not deserved either. But, Nosek says, it would still be wrong to take what they have earned away from them anyway. Why? Because even if they don't deserve it, they are still entitled to it. In the same way that people own their bodies, they also own their talent and labor and are thus entitled to whatever they produce with it, regardless of whether they are morally deserving of it or not. If I start a movie and sign a contract that gives me 10% of all sales, then I am entitled to 10% of all sales. Regardless of whether I got the part because of my acting skills, my natural good looks, or because my uncle is for instance, toward Copola. And since I am entitled to it, it would be wrong to take it from me, plain and simple. But, I have to admit. As a reason to prefer Nosek's system to Rawls, I've always found this response in adequate. Sure, it's wrong to take what someone has earned or even is entitled to from them. But why does that kind of evil trump all others? Why is one person's right to property more important than say another person's right to life? Why isn't the prevention of suffering or ensuring that people get what they morally deserve even more important? Nosek says it too wrongs don't make it right. But that cuts both ways. And yes, the fact that we shouldn't say let someone starve doesn't make stealing from the rich morally acceptable. But the fact that we shouldn't steal from the rich doesn't make letting someone starve morally acceptable. In reality, it's just a choice between two evils, the evil of stealing from the rich and the evil of letting the poor suffer. And it's far from clear to me why the latter should trump the former, especially when those it could miss that the rich are in a position to earn what they have only by a stroke of good luck and to poor are poor only by a stroke of bad luck. Why is involuntary charity worse than involuntary poverty? Besides, Rawls is not talking about income equality. He's talking about taking money that the wealthy don't need, that many of them likely wouldn't even miss and using it to simply provide basic necessities and equal opportunity to those in need. Consider two farmers. One is born with a natural talent for farming 1,000 acres of fertile land and they're brigade of brand new farming equipment and millions of dollars to keep it all running and to hire workers. Let's call him Fred. The other, it's calling Jim, is born with no talent, 100 acres of bare land and a few broken down pieces of equipment with no money to repair them. Fred produces five times more food than he could ever eat while Jim barely produces any. After ten years of hard work from both, Jim and his family are literally starving while Fred and his family have so much they eat lavishly at every meal. Now, suppose Jim has asked Fred for help but he refused to give it. Suppose I have an opportunity to steal some food from Fred and give it to Jim. Would that be wrong? Sure. But would it be as wrong as passing up the opportunity and just letting Jim starve? It seems not. At most, Fred will simply be eating slightly less luxurious meals. And if that's the right thing for me to do regarding Fred and Jim, why wouldn't it be the right thing for the government to do regarding a rich and poor? After all, no's exterior itself entails the evil of involuntary charity can be outweighed. We call that no's, no's he killed, it would be morally acceptable for a guardian to rescue a free loader from slavery even though doing so would have to be done on the paying citizens dime without consent. But if it's acceptable to use their money to protect others from the horrors of slavery, why wouldn't it be acceptable to use their money to protect others from the horrors of poverty? That's not to say that the government couldn't still go overboard taking too much in a seemingly futile attempt to make the world a perfectly fair place. No's it can self makes a very good point that a perfectly dust distribution of wealth would be impossible to maintain because any and every transaction would just undo it. So perhaps just as we did with Smith and Marks, we might agree that the answer to our question what makes society just or fair lies somewhere in between, rolls and nosic. After all, as Gahoon points out at the end of his lecture on the答ionism, before his death, even nosic himself came to realize that the view he articulated at Anarchy State in Utopia was too hard core. That brings us to the end of our discussion of political philosophy and leaves us with just one more big question to consider. It's probably the first question you thought of when you heard the title, the big questions of philosophy. But it's a question that until now we have not been prepared to tackle. Everything we've considered so far will inform our answer to perhaps the biggest question of all, what is the meaning of life?